---
title: "A radar backscatter simulation of a forest canopy using 3D physical structures derived from LiDAR scanning"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-10-08-A-radar-backscatter-simulation-of-a-forest-canopy-using-3D-physical-structures-derived-from-LIDAR-scanning
date: 2024-Oct-08
venue: 'Int. Journ. Remote Sens.'
citation: 'Esscobar-Ruiz, V., Maslanka, W., Westbrook, C., Morrison, K., Calders, K., Origo, N., Disney, M., Fox, M. (2024)&quot;A radar backscatter simulation of a forest canopy using 3D physical structures derived from LiDAR scanning.&quot; <i>Int. Journ. Remote Sens.</i>. 1-28.'
---
This study aims to explore the forest aboveground biomass relationship to C-band backscatter. A one-hectare area in Wytham Woods, located west of Oxford, was selected for this research. The area has a total of 525 trees of seven different tree species. The Michigan Microwave Canopy Scattering Model (MIMICS), a two-layer radiative transfer model, was applied to simulate canopy backscatter responses in this deciduous UK forest. Model parameters related to forest structure were derived from previously published terrestrial laser (LiDAR) data. Simulated backscatter was performed for co-polarized and cross-polarized modes at a C-band frequency range and incidence angles (20° to 45° at 5° increments). The research includes five objectives: i) backscatter sensitivity analysis from the variation of different model parameters; ii) backscatter seasonal effect under spring–summer (leaf-on) and autumn–winter (leaf-off) periods; iii) backscatter comparison between species as well as between simulated and satellite observations in a spatial pattern; iv) relationship between simulated backscatter and aboveground biomass; and v) relationship between MIMICS forest structure parameters and simulated backscatter. Sensitivity analysis results showed significant differences in backscatter from changes in leaf distribution, leaf thickness and water content (leaf, trunk and soil) for both polarization modes in leaf-on scenarios. Leaf-off scenarios presented significant differences from changes in branch distribution but only for the co-polarized mode. Seasonal variations presented significant backscatter differences between spring–summer and autumn–winter scenarios; additionally, backscatter differences among species for each seasonality in the co-polarized mode were observed. The computation of the grid resolution (20m×20m) showed a range of backscatter values depending on the grid and incidence angle. Higher backscatter values were observed for the satellite data than for the simulated data. Finally, the aboveground biomass and the MIMICS input parameters presented high random variability and little systematic co-variation with the total backscatter on both simulated seasons, suggesting that more robust allometric equations for biomass estimation are required.

[Download paper here](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01431161.2024.2403626)

