---
title: "Using geostationary-satellite-derived sub-daily fire radiative power variability versus prescribed diurnal cycles to assess the impact of African fires on tropospheric ozone"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-12-03-Using-geostationary-satellite-derived-sub-daily-fire-radiative-power-variability-versus-prescribed-diurnal-cycles-to-assess-the-impact-of-African
date: 2025-Dec-03
venue: 'Atmos. Chem. Phys.'
citation: 'Wang, H., Maslanka, W., Palmer, P. I., Wooster, M. J., Wang, H., Yao, F., Feng, L., Wu, K., Lu, X., and Fan, S.: Using geostationary-satellite-derived sub-daily fire radiative power variability versus prescribed diurnal cycles to assess the impact of African fires on tropospheric ozone, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 25, 17501–17526, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-25-17501-2025, 2025.'
---
Assessing the impact of biomass burning (BB) emissions on tropospheric ozone is critical for understanding air pollution and climate interactions. BB emission inventories like Global Fire Emissions Database and Global Fire Assimilation System, typically based on sun-synchronous satellite observations, report emissions on daily, weekly or longer timescales with empirically derived factors generally used to overlay diurnal variations. To explore the sensitivity of tropospheric ozone to diurnal variability, we incorporated day-specific hourly BB variations inferred from geostationary satellite data into the GEOS-Chem atmospheric chemistry transport model. The simulations were compared with those using established inventories and evaluated against in situ and satellite observations. Simulations with real hourly-resolved emissions produce comparable surface ozone biases (−1.54 to +9.09 ppbv vs. −1.58 to +9.13 ppbv) and marginally higher correlations with TROPOMI nitrogen dioxide (r = 0.80–0.89) and OMI ozone (r = 0.80–0.94). Although the statistical improvements are limited, the geostationary-driven approach reveals pronounced regional ozone differences and mechanistic insights into the role of diurnal fire variability. Data-driven diurnal BB variations across Africa cause significant surface ozone changes (−8.57 to +21.88 ppbv) and alter tropospheric ozone columns by −0.41 to 1.09 DU, particularly in regions with intense fire activity like Angola and Zambia. These changes propagate globally, shifting regional OH concentrations by −4.4 % to +51.7 %. These findings emphasize the critical role of accurately describing diurnal BB variations in atmospheric models to better quantify its impacts on atmospheric composition, providing insights for Earth system model development and the use of geostationary-derived BB emissions datasets.

[Download paper here](https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/25/17501/2025/)

